---
layout: post
title: About
cover: about_blank.png
categories: posts
---
# PHYSICAL BIOLOGY of the CELL @ GIST 2019

## About
This intensive week-long mini-course explores the way that physical and
mathematical models can be used to understand biological systems. The course
begins by examining the way in which simple order of magnitude estimates can be
used to provide insights into problems ranging from the fidelity of protein
translation to how far a bird can fly without stopping. This is followed by the
use of statistical mechanics to explore problems in regulatory biology. Some
examples include the physics of post-translational modifications, how cells
make transcriptional decisions and the precision with which embryonic
development takes place. The next part of the course focuses on how organisms
pack and access their genomes. We start with a description of the problem of
viral DNA packing and then turn to the study of the eukaryotic nucleosome. From
there, we turn to the study of organization in biological systems with emphasis
on one-dimensional ordering in the filamentous structures of the cytoskeleton
to the two-dimensional ordering seen at the cell membrane. Finally, we will
examine the role biophysics plays in "biology's greatest idea" -- evolution. In
addition to these topics, the course also involves an intensive hands-on project
using computation to do image segmentation and quantification in order to find
the fluorescence of individual cells and to use this fluorescence to compare to
statistical mechanical models of gene regulation.


## Where and When?
This course takes place from January 20 - 25, 2017 at GIST.

- **Lecture \|** 09:00 - 17:00 in College C.102
- **Lab \|** 19:00 - 22:00 in College B.416 (Wet Lab) and College B.214 (Optical Tweezer Lab).
